A Mathematical Approach
to Classifying Poi Patterns

a poi paper by

Ben Drexler aka “Drex”

Contact:
drex@drexfactor.com
http://www.drexfactor.com

1

Table of Contents
A. Introduction
B. Fundamentals
1. Background on Periodic Math
2. Modeling Flowers and Other Simple Poi Patterns
3. Modeling Third-Order Motions
4. Modeling Simple Weaves
5. Modeling Body Tracers
6. Modeling Complex Weaves
7. Modeling Toroids
​
a. Modeling Isobend Toroids
​
b. Modeling Antibend Toroids
​
c. Modeling Probend Toroids
8. A Generalized Equation for Modeling Poi Patterns in this Paper
9. Linear Extensions
10. Composite Patterns
​
a. CAPs
​
b. Stalls
​
c. Composite Toroids
C. Defining Elementary Poi Patterns
​
1. Flowers
​
​
a. Petals vs Lobes/Antilobes
​
​
b. Antispin and Inspin
​
​
c. Unit Circle Patterns
​
2. Third-Order Motions
​
​
a. Fractal Flowers
​
​
b. Triquetra Expansions
​
3. Manifolds
​
​
a. Weaves
​
​
b. Body Tracers
​
​
c. Toroids
​
​
​
i. Isobend Toroids
​
​
​
ii. Antibend Toroids
​
​
​
iii. Probend Toroids
D. Conclusions
E. Thanks and Acknowledgements

2

A. Introduction
The art of poi may be one of the most unique confluences of art, movement, math, and science
in the modern era. At its root, the art is based in tribal dances practiced by the Maori of New
Zealand for an unknown period before being exported to the Western world to integrate with a
variety of martial arts, dance, and other prop manipulation styles. In its current form, spinning
poi focuses on the creation of curves in space using a weighted end connected via a flexible
tether to the performer’s hand. Despite such simple apparatus, in the past decade poi has
exploded in its vocabulary and number of practitioners.
As poi has acquired more practitioners and edged ever closer to a mainstream pursuit, it has
also become the focal point of a variety of controversies among its practitioners. One such
series of controversies is over the definition of even some of the most basic poi moves. As much
of the movement vocabulary for poi has been created on an ad hoc basis or passed down via
oral tradition rather than recorded or formalized in deliberate fashion, there exist strong regional
differences in definitions, movement vocabularies, and interpretations of how movements
interrelate to the point that such conflicts are all but inevitable.
We in the poi world are fortunate, however, in that much of the vocabulary of our art can be
modeled using fairly trivial mathematics. Indeed, the vast majority of shapes and tricks we poi
spinners produce can be modeled using trig functions that many of us learned in high school.
This provides us with two opportunities: the first is that by understanding how the values in
these equations generate the moves we are familiar with, we can easily enter alternate values
to create patterns we have yet to experience. This expands our vocabulary as well as our
understanding of the art. Second: we can find the boundaries of values necessary to produce
given families of tricks. It is this second benefit that is most intriguing, for it offers us an
opportunity to formalize the definitions of poi tricks in a way that is easily falsifiable and thus
finally come to discuss poi within the context of a true shared vocabulary.
Given that this method of modeling poi movement through mathematics is not well known within
the poi community at large, I have written this paper with the following two goals:
1.​ Educate the general public and flow community as to how to model poi moves utilizing
the trig functions I was taught years ago.
2.​ Create the first formal classification scheme for poi tricks based in mathematical values
rather than arbitrary metaphors or imprecise words
In order to restrict the length of what is already a painfully long paper, I am limiting the scope of
what I cover only to patterns and tricks that are identifiable when performed with a single poi
sans the body of the performer. As such, this paper does not include any information that covers
the following topics: hybrids, inversions, timing and direction, etc (I’ve got to have some stuff to
save for a follow-up if ever I get crazy enough to attempt a follow-up). With that in mind, this
paper will consist of two sections: the first is meant to teach the reader the fundamentals of how
3

trig functions can be used to model poi movement. It will cover trig equations that model a
variety of different types of common poi moves. After covering all of these cases, I will use them
to generalize an equation from which we can model any and all of the poi patterns covered in
this paper (and hopefully pretty much every single poi pattern possible). I will use this equation
in the second half of the paper to set down definitions for each category of poi movement
modeled in the first half of the paper.
Let’s start with the math.

B. Fundamentals
Poi consists of a small weight on the end of a tether connected to a person’s hand. The usual
practice is to perform with 2 poi, one for each hand, though explorations of 3 and 4 poi
configurations have become more common in recent years. The materials used for this prop
vary widely according to the performer, location, and resources at hand. However,
fundamentally all tricks the performer may create with the poi will be based upon the idea of
introducing accelerations in various directions through the tether to the head, leading to an
abundance of possible patterns.
The dominant approach to poi performance for the better part of a decade has been to spin the
poi in patterns that can be derived from vertical curves, presenting the audience with as full a
profile of said curves as possible. Given that the most common approaches to these tricks are
to induce the poi to travel in a circular or elliptical path around the hand/handle, we can use
math designed to describe circles and gradually add layers of complexity as needed to make
the equations capable of displaying more complex patterns. First, a few caveats:
This type of math is excellent for describing the simple system of how two points in space relate
to each other over time, but not how they interact with other objects introduced into the system.
As such, we can use this method to describe how the poi moves in space, but how it moves in
relation to the body is in many cases outside the bounds of this type of mathematical modeling.
For this system, we will focus exclusively on the patterns the poi head and handle generate over
time and not focus as much on how these patterns interact with the body nor how it presents
obstacles that specific types of moves are designed to avoid. As such, any and all contact
moves, wraps, inside moves, and throws are not covered in this breakdown.
This type of math is excellent for modeling complete poi patterns but is less helpful when
modeling partial or composite patterns. While a section exists to describe some elementary
versions of these patterns, the complexity of the modeling increases dramatically the more
moves we try to understand in sequence.
Modeling poi in this fashion is agnostic of gravity--due to the forces of acceleration placed on
the poi head, this frequently is not as important to understanding a pattern as the
mathematically perfect version of said pattern is, but it is worth noting as a shortfall of this
4

approach.
1. Background on Periodic Math
This section will work heavily in the fundamental math behind periodic functions. It is not
necessary to read this section completely to understand everything that comes after it,
especially if the reader already has an operating knowledge of Trigonometry. If the reader would
like, they can skip this section to avoid the basic math and move on to how it applies to poi by
clicking here.
Trigonometric functions provide the easiest means of
modeling the behavior of cyclical functions over time. I
am indebted to Adam Dipert for first teaching me how
cycloid math could be simplified to provide a good
model for poi movement and Will Ruddick for assisting
me in creating computer simulations that taught me the
depth to which these movements could be modeled
using this mathematical approach.
To begin, we need an understanding of sine and
cosine functions. To the left is a chart of a basic right
triangle defined by angles ABC and sides abh. If we
pick angle A as our home base, we can see it has two
intersecting sides: b and h. Side h is referred to the
hypotenuse as it is the only side that does not intersect with the right angle of the triangle, angle
C. The remaining two sides are labeled according to their relationship with angle A: b is referred
to as the adjacent side because it, along with the hypotenuse intersects at said angle. Side a is
referred to as the opposite side as it is the side opposite angle A.
To define our first trigonometric function, we will establish a relationship between the lengths of
sides a (the opposite) and h (the hypotenuse), that is if we divide a by h, we get a relationship
𝑎

referred to as the sine of angle A (𝑠𝑖𝑛𝐴 = ℎ ). Depending upon the measure of angle A, a and h
will have set proportions ranging from 0:1 to 1:1. Sine is usually abbreviated as sin in these
equations.
Our second trigonometric function is the cosine function, which has a different relationship to
angle A than the sine function does. For cosine, we are dividing b (the adjacent side) by h (the
𝑏

hypotenuse), resulting in the equation 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝐴 = ℎ . As with the sine function, cosine will have set
proportions depending on the size of angle A ranging from 1:1 to 0:1, but the proportion will
always be different than sine A except in the special case when a = b, or the two sides are of
equivalent length.
5

Now that we know the basics of these functions, let’s learn a little bit about how we can graph
the results of them out and change the resulting graph by adding particular values to different
parts of the function.
To start, we will get results for a few values of 𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑥(please note, I am using radians for
values of x--to get the same values, ensure that your calculator is in RAD mode, not DEG. To
find out why I’m doing this and what radians are, click here):
x
0
π
4
π
2
3π
4

π
5π
4
3π
2
7π
4

y

0
0.707*
1
0.707*
0
-0.707*
-1
-0.707*
0

2π
* For these values I have truncated down a much longer number to only three decimal places
As we can see, even though the value of x continues to rise, the value of y cycles between 1
and -1, passing through numbers in between in predictable intervals. The animated image
below displays how this equation is graphed with all values of x between 0 and 2π:

As you can see, graphing this equation produces a gentle, wave-like curve that is known as a
sine wave. The sine wave goes no further than 1 unit positive or negative away from the x-axis
and begins to repeat its results after 2π. We are going to introduce two terms here that will be
used as placeholders to describe the exact same ideas: first, we are going to say that this wave
has an amplitude of 1 (maximum distance from the x-axis) and second that it has a wavelength
6

of 2π (distance between points where the wave starts to repeat itself). We are now going to see
how we can change both the amplitude and the wavelength of 𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑥.
To start, we will change the wavelength of this equation. We will accomplish this by multiplying x
before it’s had a chance to pass through the sine function. Think about it this way: whenever we
π

enter 2 in, we want the answer we get at π--the point twice as far along the curve. We would
write this equation out as 𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑥), which changes the values from the table above to those
below:
x
0

y

0
1
0
-1
0
1
0
-1
0

π
4
π
2
3π
4

π
5π
4
3π
2
7π
4

2π
π

Note how the value for y that we get now at 2 is equivalent to our old value for π and now
equivalent to our old value for

3π
is
4

3π
This, then produces the graph below.
2

7

Sure enough--our graph still has amplitude 1, but now it begins repeating at π rather than 2π.
But what about the amplitude? Changing the value of x before it integrates into the sine function
overall didn’t have any effect the amplitude of the y values for the equation, so we will have to
make this amendment after the sine function has already performed its function. Let’s do this by
checking our values for 𝑦 = 2 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑥. Now our table comes out with these values:
x
0
π
4
π
2
3π
4

π
5π
4
3π
2
7π
4

y

0
1.414*
2
1.414*
0
-1.414*
-2
-1.414*
0

2π
8

* Again, I have truncated a longer number to only 3 decimal places for clarity’s sake.
Now our y values go between -2 and 2 rather than -1 and 1 while the function goes back to
repeating at 2π. As you can see, adding a 2 to this equation in these different spots produces
radically different results! Here is the graph for this equation:

Success!
There is one final transformation we can perform on this equation that does not change the
amplitude or the wavelength, but is nonetheless important. By now you may have noticed that
the origin of this graph always occurs at 0 on the x axis. There is a relatively simple method we
can use to bump this graph a little bit to either side slightly, starting it in a slightly different spot
along the curve. To do this, we actually have to add or subtract values before the sine function,
π

using the equation 𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑥 + 2 ). Now our table of values comes out:
x
0
π
4
π
2
3π
4

π

y

1
0.707*
0
-0.707*
-1
-0.707*
9

5π
4
3π
2
7π
4

0
0.707*
1

2π
* Yup! Once again these values have been truncated!
Now our equation starts at 1 rather than 0. The resulting graph looks like this:

Now the graph begins on a peak at 0 rather than halfway between a peak and a valley. There’s
another fun side-effect of this transformation, as well. You may have noticed we have yet to
graph anything with our cosine function--it turns out that 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑥 produces the exact same
π

result as 𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑥 + 2 ). Please note: this will not be the case for most other values we could
add to x in this equation--there are a whole range of different starting points available to us for
this wave!
With these results in mind, then, we can think of a generalized equation for graphing wave
functions that looks something like this:
10

𝑦 = 𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑏𝑥 + 𝑐)
Where a is the amplitude of the wave, b is the wavelength, and c is how far we are displacing
the wave along the x axis. Knowing what these three variables do will be hugely helpful in
navigating the rest of this paper!
Now let’s apply this knowledge to graphing curves that meet back up upon themselves, such as
circles. Because sine and cosine graphs of the same variable have peaks that are offset by a
quarter of a wavelength, we can use the two functions together to graph a circle by using the
equations 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 and 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 where t is equal to all values between 0 and 2π.
A Note on Radians
Why 2π? Instead of degrees, mathematicians using trigonometry more frequently use a method
for measuring angles called radians. Because the circumference of a circle is equal to double
the radius times pi (2π𝑟), we can imagine setting the value of 𝑟 aside to think of the distance
around the circle as being 2π. We then can think of any fraction of that distance as being the
measure of the angle we are hoping to achieve. For example, 90 degrees is the angle we
achieve by dividing a circle into ¼, so we can also express the size of this angle by dividing 2π
π

by 4, where we get a value of 2 . If it’s easier to think in degrees than radians, simply take any
value of t I present in the rest of the paper and perform the following operation on it to get the

( ). For the rest of this paper we will assume t = all

equivalent in degrees (d): 𝑑 = 𝑡

180
π

values between 0 and 2π unless otherwise noted.
A Note on the Unit Circle
Using sine and cosine functions to graph a circle is a technique used in geometry called the unit
circle--a circle with a radius of 1 unit. The traditional convention is to graph the unit circle and all
derivatives of it by assigning the cosine function to the x axis and the sine function to the y axis,
giving us 𝑥 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 and 𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡. I’m not using the traditional approach to graphing the unit
circle for two reasons: the first is that it sets the start point for any given pattern at the far right
side of the x axis, leading to shapes like triquetras pointing to the right instead of up and I
personally prefer the aesthetics of those patterns pointed up naturally. The second is much
more subjective and it’s that my dominant direction of spin is clockwise, whereas the traditional
approach to graphing the unit circle leads to the pattern being built counter-clockwise.
If you’re a traditionalist, you can just reverse the equations on the x and y axis to get results that
will fit into the traditional convention for graphing curves of this sort. All of the conclusions
reached in the course of this paper are valid whether this operation is performed or not.
2. Modeling Flowers and Other Simple Poi Patterns
11

To be able to see how these functions relate to poi, it is helpful to be able to graph them to
visualize the interactions of the different variables. This can be done with any graphing
calculator or personal computer programs for graphing, including Grapher for Mac (found under
Applications => Utilities) or Microsoft Mathematics for PC (downloadable here). Most diagrams
included from here on out will be screen captures of graphs produced in Grapher and will
include the equation used to produce the graph as a visual aid. The first such graph can be
found below:

Above we have the graph of the equations we arrived at in the previous section: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡,
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 where t is equivalent to all values between 0 and 2π. First, ensure that if your
calculator has one, that it is set to parametric mode. When we plug these equations into our
graphing calculator, we should get the result shown above: a circle with a radius of 1. It is the
first poi pattern we will model in this paper as it can be considered the pattern that is created by
a single poi performing a static spin, or rotating around an unmoving hand. The hand and/or
handle may be considered an infinitely small point at the very center of this graph. In real life,
our hands do move a bit when performing static spin but the graph is meant to indicate an ideal
state for this move--what we are hoping to achieve whether we are physically able to or not.
Now let’s try a slightly more complex pattern, graphing 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡:

12

At first it may look as though this is the same graph, but looks can be deceiving. I have zoomed
out of the graph to ensure it would completely fit on the screen. As a result, it may be easy to
miss the fact that the radius of this circle is now 2 instead of 1, meaning that the circle is twice
as far across as well as twice the circumference as the previous circle. So what does this have
to do with poi patterns? Did the poi get twice as long? Not quite. Let me show you the same
graph with one small addition:

13

Now you will note a smaller circle inside the bigger circle with
the smaller circle being modeled with the same equation as the
one we used in our first diagram. Here, the relationship
between the two is easier to see--the bigger circle is intended
to be the pattern of the poi as it traces an extension around a
handpath that is one poi length in radius. In other words, we
can think of the first pair of terms in the graph as describing the
movement of the handpath and the second pair describing the
movement of the poi as shown to the right:
With this relationship in mind, we can now model a more complex poi path--perhaps a flower
using the equations 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡):

In this case, we can see we have graphed out a 1-petal inspin flower with a handpath that is still
1 poi length in radius--what changed? As you can see from the equation, the terms that govern
the movement of the poi have been adjusted such that we are now multiplying t by 2 before we
find the sine value of it. This means that the terms governing the movement of the poi are now
completing 2 circles for every 1 circle the handpath terms are completing. But how can we be
completing 2 circles while getting 1 petal? The method for graphing we are using is based upon
Cartesian coordinates, wherein there is an “up” and a “down” (I know I am overgeneralizing this
and I apologize). The poi in this pattern completes two “down” beats for every one “down” beat
that the hand completes, thus giving rise to the pattern.
Let’s see what happens if the poi terms incorporate a -2 instead of a 2, resulting in the equations
14

𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 2𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 2𝑡):

This results in a vastly different looking pattern, but still one wherein the poi has 2 “down” beats
for every “down” beat the hand completes. You can see this clearly outlined below:

We would identify the pattern on the right as being a 3-petalled antispin flower, or colloquially a
triquetra. A pattern should already be apparent from these two graphs: when t is multiplied by a
positive number in the poi terms, the resulting graph will show an inspin pattern. When t is
15

multiplied by a negative number in the poi terms, the resulting graph will show an antispin
pattern. Let’s verify this prediction by graphing 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(3𝑡):

And 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡):

The prediction has been verified for these two cases! When we multiply t by 3 in the poi terms,
16

the resulting graph is the pattern for a 2-petal inspin flower while multiplying t by -3 in the poi
terms results in the pattern for a 4-petal antispin flower. You may have noticed that if we replace
the number we multiply t by in the poi terms with the variable d (“down” beats), resulting in the
following equation: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑑𝑡), we can then predict the number of
petals p that will result with the following equation: 𝑝 = |1 − 𝑑|. For d=-2, we can see that p=3
and for d=3 we can see that p=2. The equation works!
But what about if we want to model patterns that fit into the poi unit circle family--that is, poi
patterns in which the handpath is half a poi length in radius rather than a full poi length in
radius? We will model one such pattern, an isolation, with the following equation:
1

1

𝑥 = 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑦 = 2 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 − 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡.

I’ve opted not to zoom into this graph to provide a proper sense of scale. For this equation, we
do indeed find that now the radius of the circle produced is ½ the poi length. Even more
interesting, the handpath and poi path graphs are now the same graph because the poi terms
have been set to the opposite end of the circle by making both the poi terms negative terms
instead of positive terms. We can switch this to the graph of a unit circle extension by switching
1

1

the poi terms to positive, making the equations 𝑥 = 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑦 = 2 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡:

17

Now we can see that the graph of poi terms describes a circle 1½ poi lengths in radius with a
handpath in the center that has a ½ poi length radius. Now what about if we wanted to include
cateyes? Since cateyes are antispin patterns, we will have to multiply t in the poi terms by a
1

negative number: -1. The equation for a cateye, then, will be 𝑥 = 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡),
1

𝑦 = 2 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑡). The graph for this pattern is below:

18

If you are curious, you can also model a horizontal cateye with the following equation:
1

1

𝑥 = 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡), 𝑦 = 2 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑡).

With these examples, we can then state with confidence that we can describe all flowers and
unit circle patterns with the following equation:
𝑥 = (ℎ · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑝(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡))
𝑦 = (ℎ · 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡) + 𝑝(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑑𝑡))
Where h is the radius of the handpath, p is the phasing of the poi at the beginning of the pattern,
and d is the number of downbeats of the poi relative to the handpath’s downbeats. So given the
examples we have above, we could plug the following values in for the variables:
Triquetra:
ℎ=1
𝑝=1
𝑑 =− 2

Isolation:
ℎ =½
𝑝 =− 1
𝑑=1

2-petal Inspin:
ℎ=1
𝑝=1
𝑑=3

Cateye:
ℎ =½
𝑝=1
𝑑 =− 1

Extension:
ℎ=1
𝑝=1
𝑑=1

This in and of itself is enough of a model to describe most 2D spinning that poi performers
engage in. But it is still limited in that it does not describe either third-order motions or any form
of 3D spinning. We can expand our equation, however, to make these two types of movement
possible to model. We will start with third-order motions because they can be modeled in a 2D
environment as well.
19

3. Modeling Third-Order Motions
Third-order motions are an extension of flowers that were first named by Damien Boisbouvier1
after analysis of a number of patterns including Zan’s Diamond. Where flowers consist of two
centers of rotation (the center of the handpath and the handle of the poi), third-order motions
are generated by adding a third center of rotation. This is usually accomplished in two ways:
1.​ By treating the elbow as the center of the handle’s rotation with the shoulder as the
center of the elbow’s rotation
2.​ Having the hand trace around the outside of an imaginary pattern with two centers of
rotation, such that these first two centers are virtual rather than explicitly seen in the
pattern.
Either way, we already possess the tools to model this type of movement by extrapolating what
we already know about flowers. Since we now have three centers of rotation, we can add an
additional term to our equation to accomplish this task. For example, we can graph Zan’s
Diamond with the following equation: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡) + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(5𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(5𝑡).

1

http://www.homeofpoi.com/community/ubbthreads.php/topics/920391/Third_order_Motions_three_circ.ht
ml#Post920391

20

Again, I have also graphed the handpath so its relationship with the poi pattern is clear. In this
case, the handpath follows the general pattern of a 4-petal antispin flower, with the poi adding
two petals for every one petal the handpath leaves. It is
important to note that in this update to our equation, the
terms governing the handpath and poi movement have
changed slightly. While the last set of terms still
governs the poi, now the first two sets of terms govern
the hand instead of just the first one as outlined in the
diagram on the side. We can see another example of
this type of pattern with what has been dubbed a
“fractal” flower and in graphing it we will see why the
term applies. For this graph, we use the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 2𝑡) − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(4𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 2𝑡) − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(4𝑡).

Here, we can see that the core handpath of the pattern is a Triquetra with a 6-petal pattern
overlaid on top of it. If we imagine that the first set of terms multiplies its t variable by 1, then the
relationship between the multipliers of the first two t’s comes out to 1:-2 or if we were to divide
them, -½. Likewise, because the relationship between the t multipliers in the last term and the
second is -2:4, we can divide them to arrive at a proportion of -½. In other words, the number of
downbeats added between the first and second term is proportionally the same as that added
between the second and third term. Because this pattern demonstrates a limited degree of
recursion in its structure, we refer to it as a fractal flower after the concept of a mathematical set
that displays self-recursion.

21

Both Zan’s Diamond as well as the fractal flower above also demonstrate a common
phenomenon in performing third-order motions: adding two antispin petals for every petal
encountered in the handpath. I will label this family of third-order motions “triquetra expansions”
as they can also be thought of as adding one triquetra per petal. I will give formulas for both
triquetra expansions as well as fractal flowers at the end of this section.
Thus far, all the patterns we have seen are examples of what would be called antispin-antispin
third-order motions. That is, the handpath displays the patterns we saw above in antispin
flowers and the direction of the poi is opposite that of the hand. This framework also predicts
inspin-antispin, antispin-inspin, and inspin-inspin third-order motions. Though these latter three
types are rarely performed, I will nonetheless provide modeled examples of each, starting with
inspin-antispin: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡) − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 5𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(3𝑡) − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 5𝑡).

This pattern grafts a triquetra expansion on a 2-petal inspin handpath. For an antispin-inspin, we
will use the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡) − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 7𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡) − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 7𝑡).

22

This pattern results in a core handpath pattern of a 3-petal antispin flower with a 1-petal inspin
grafted onto each antispin petal. You may note that the third t multiplier is a negative number
just like the second t multiplier--this doesn’t mean that we’ve lost the antispin-inspin pattern we
were shooting for, only that I had to do a little bit of mathematical wrangling to ensure proper
petal placing on the poi pattern. Another approach to doing the same operation would be to add
pi to the multiplier of last set of t terms, such that: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡) − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(7𝑡 + π),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡) − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(7𝑡 + π)
Finally, inspin-inspin can be executed with the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡) + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(5𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(3𝑡) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(5𝑡):

23

Here, we’ve added one inspin petal for every inspin petal of a 2-petal inspin handpath. With
several of these patterns now presented, we can assemble an equation with enough variable
assignments to cover everything we can do with third-order motions. That equation is presented
below:
𝑥 = (ℎ · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑝(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡)) + 𝑞(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑓𝑡))
𝑦 = (ℎ · 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡) + 𝑝(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑑𝑡)) + 𝑞(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑓𝑡))
Such that h is the radius of the first center of rotation (either the shoulder or imaginary), p is the
phasing of the second center of rotation (handpath), d is the number of downbeats the handpath
possesses, q is the phasing of the poi pattern, and f is the number of downbeats in the poi
pattern. That’s a lot of variables to keep track of! As mentioned above, here are some recipes
both for triquetra expansions and fractal flowers:
For triquetra expansions of antispin-antispin third-order motions, 𝑝 =± 1, 𝑑 ≤− 1, 𝑞 =− 𝑝,
𝑓 = |𝑑| + 2
2

For fractal flowers in antispin-antispin, 𝑝 =± 1, 𝑑 ≤− 1, 𝑞 =± 1, 𝑓 = 𝑑 . Please note that
values for p and q may need to be tried in different combinations until the desired aesthetic
effect is reached for the resulting pattern.
We now have an equation that satisfies the requirements for all flowers (where ℎ = 0and 𝑑 = 1)
and all third-order motions. We still have yet to see both some of the most basic poi patterns
and some of the most advanced patterns as well, including weaves and toroids. For these, we
must add additional values for movement in the z-axis for movements that require depth.
4. Modeling Simple Weaves
Most if not all 3D poi patterns that do not utilize plane breaks (more on those later) do utilize
plane bends to attain their shapes. I am indebted to Alien Jon for the idea of christening this
family of moves manifolds after the topological concept to which they all adhere.2 This family of
movement contains, but is not limited to weaves, thread the needles, inside moves (inversions,
introversions, lovelaces, barrel rolls, etc), body tracers, and toroids. To begin to model these
movements, we must add a z-dimension to our equations to begin to process them in terms of
depth. As we examine these shapes, please note that as with our flowers, these patterns are
being modeled agnostic of real-world coordinates such that x, y, and z axes are relative to the
desired coordinates of the performer. x could just as easily be up-down as it could be side-side
or even be measured along a diagonal axis.
Let us begin with the simplest of all manifolds: the 2 beat weave. Functionally, modeling this
2

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manifolds

24

move is identical to modeling one hand’s performing the standard 2 beat weave, thread the
needle, windmill, crosser, hip reel, and indeed any 3-dimensional 2 beat move with a single
cross point. To model this, we use the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡.

This results in a pattern in which the poi oscillates slightly different in two axes than it does in
the third one. To better see this illustrated, I’ve tweaked the graph just slightly to see the shape
produced not just by the poi head but also the tether in three dimensions.

25

Here we see the behavior of the poi is a plane that intersects and twists upon itself, producing
what topologists refer to as a self-intersecting plane or real projective plane.3 To tease out what
is going on in this equation, let’s take the pieces we’re already familiar with: in 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡). We have an equation that theoretically should yield a circle with radius 1, we just
happen to be drawing it twice. By adding 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 we are saying that for every time the poi
returns to its starting point in the z axis, it has returned to its starting point twice in both the x
and y axes, thus completing two “beats” for every one “beat” on the z axis. The hand path here
can be understood as a straight line back and forth across the z axis.
But what about a more complex weave, like say a 3-beat weave? It is actually easier to achieve
than you may think. All we have to do is change the 2 multiplier on the x and y axis to 3 instead,
yielding this equation: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(3𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡.

Here we have the poi completing 3 “beats” in the x and y axis in the time it can return to its
starting point on the z axis. Once again, the handpath has been simplified down to a straight line
in very much the same way that we simplified the handpath of a static spin down to an infinitely
small point. We can extrapolate this same pattern out to create 5 and 7 beat weaves easily. The
equation we would use to describe these simple weaves, then, would look like this:
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡)
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑑𝑡)
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡
3

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_projective_plane

26

Where d is the number of beats in the weave we are trying to model. Now again bear in mind,
this approach to modeling is totally agnostic of orientation to the body, so 5 beat weaves can
come out looking identical to lovelaces and barrel rolls. A more comprehensive approach that
includes the body will be needed to properly sort out all these subtypes of simple weave
manifolds.
5. Modeling Body Tracers
To make matters slightly more complex, however, we can model body tracers. These are flowers
that do deviate along the z axis such that a petal or two can be placed behind the body. One
simple example can be modeled using the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(3𝑡),
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡:

It may be difficult to tell from this angle, but this is actually a 2-petal inspin flower with one petal
high on the top/down axis and one petal low down on this same axis. To aid with identification, I
have added the following view from slightly above this one:

27

This will result in a 2-petal inspin flower in which one of those petals will be behind the
performer and the other petal in front of the performer. It could also be a flower in which one
petal is on their right side and the other is on their left side, or even perhaps one above their
head and one below their shoulders. Either way, the performer is achieving not only a 2-petal
inspin flower, but also varying the flower’s depth in space to vary the placement of the petals
around their body. We can achieve similar results by multiplying t in the poi terms by -3 instead
of 3 to get a 4-petal antispin body tracer using the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡.

28

Again, the perspective is a little confusing. The top petal of the flower is the bit that is farthest to
the left of the image while the bottom petal is the loop that crosses the arrow pointing to the
lower right corner. Here it is from slightly above to clarify the shape slightly:

Just like with the 2-petal inspin flower, the top petal here can be placed on one side of the body
and the bottom petal on the other side. Really, body tracers can be modeled with an equation
almost identical to the one we used for flowers earlier in document only with the simple addition
29

of a sine function on the z axis.
𝑥 = (ℎ · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑝(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡))
𝑦 = (ℎ · 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡) + 𝑝(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑑𝑡))
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡
So far our exploration of manifolds has not required any math that is radically different from what
we have already explored, but we have yet to explore more complex weaves or toroids. These
will be the greatest challenges we encounter in our attempts to model poi patterns.
6. Modeling Complex Weaves
First: what is a complex weave? We’ve already discussed 2-, 3-, 5-, and 7-beat weaves and set
aside inside moves for another time, what could be more complicated than these? Well, weaves
have more or less become a de facto title assigned to the performance of moves that would be
normally considered in the flower family, but wrap around the body in ways more complex than a
body tracer. Body tracers fundamentally are built out of 2-beat weaves in that part of the pattern
is on one side of the body and part is on the other side of the body. Complex weaves involve
creating versions of patterns where the complete pattern exists on each side of the body. For
example, one can perform a triquetra weave wherein rather than having part of the triquetra on
each side of the body (as in a body tracer), we use one petal of the triquetra as a cross point to
transition from a triquetra on one side of the body to one on the other side. This particular
instance can be modeled using the following equation: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡) + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 4𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡) + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 4𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡. Here is that pattern already rotated to a point where it will
be more intelligible:

30

Here is the same pattern with the handpath also graphed to provide a reference point as to how
the hand and poi paths are interacting.

As you can see, the hand path is nearly identical to a 2-beat weave, so the resulting poi path is
bent around it. I will not model additional complex weaves as I think it is easy enough to think of
other patterns that conform to this framework. However, I will provide the equation with
variables necessary to model these patterns for yourself. Bear in mind, when you hear people
31

mention things like isolation or cateye weaves, this is how to model such a thing.
𝑥 = ℎ(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡)) + 𝑝(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑓𝑡))
𝑦 = ℎ(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑑𝑡)) + 𝑝(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑓𝑡))
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡
Where h is the radius of the handpath in the x/y axes:
●​ d is the number of beats the hand gets for every beat along the depth or z axis,
●​ p is the phasing of the poi pattern,
●​ and f is the number of downbeats the poi has in relation to the number of beats in the
handpath.
Bear in mind if you are trying to produce a flower where 𝑓 =− 2, you will now have to make
𝑓 =− 2 · 𝑑 in order for the pattern to model properly. Here variable values for a few such
patterns:
Isolated 3-beat weave:
ℎ =½
𝑑=3
𝑝 =− 1
𝑓=3

Cateye 3-beat weave:
ℎ =½
𝑑=3
𝑝=1
𝑓 =− 3

2-petal inspin 2-beat:
ℎ=1
𝑑=2
𝑝=1
𝑓=3

7. Modeling Toroids
Toroids are the most complex type of movement we will address in this document. Modeling
them requires not just tracking oscillations in all three axes, but simultaneously using the math
of flowers coupled with the math for describing staff patterns. Why is this? Simply put, toroids
are centered around the idea that rather than rotating the poi on an axis parallel to the axis of
the handpath, we add the idea that it is now the poi plane that rotates on this axis parallel to that
of the handpath. This mean that the poi plane now behaves much more like a staff than it does
a poi and that the axis the poi rotates on is constantly shifting in relation to the hand. This
results in patterns that are fully three-dimensional and consist of multiple plane bends. There
are multiple frameworks for categorizing toroids, but for the purpose of this paper I am going to
use the framework outlined by Ted Petrosky and Charlie Cushing4--known colloquially as the
“East Coast” method5 for categorizing toroids.
This framework distinguishes between three types of toroids based upon the movement of the
plane relative to the movement of the hand. Like flowers, these toroids produce multiple petals6,
4

https://www.facebook.com/groups/poitheory/permalink/266786586705417/
http://youtu.be/IrS-NdpnEHo
6
I realize the term petal isn’t appropriately applied in this instance--I will be exploring this issue in depth
later on in the paper.
5

32

but each of the different toroid types will produce differing numbers and locations of plane bends
to produce the same number of petals. These three types are:
1.​ Isobend--in which the poi plane
is locked in a synchronous orbit to
the handpath, so that effectively
the plane is always perpendicular
to the handpath. This results in
toroid patterns that look similar to
the props of a propeller and tend
to look like crosses and Xs when
viewed head on. These are the
toroids most similar to traditional
flowers and indeed can be
flattened down to traditional
flowers by reducing the distance the poi travels along the z axis till the flower is flattened
completely down to a standard flower. These are the toroid equivalent of an extension or
isolation.​
2.​ Antibend--in which the poi plane completes one or more turns in the direction opposite
to the handpath’s rotation in the time
it takes to complete one handpath.
This results in the poi plane
switching between moments in
which it is perpendicular to the
handpath and moments when it is
tangent to the handpath. If one
conceptualizes a torus as having
one side that faces the center and
one side that faces the outside,
antibend patterns tend to result in
poi paths wherein the poi never
travels on the inside of the torus. When viewed head-on, this approach can create
polygonal patterns using straight lines that would otherwise be impossible in traditional
flowers, such as triangles, squares, and pentagrams. These are the toroid equivalent of
antispin in 2D spinning.​
3.​ Probend--in which the poi plane
completes more than one turn in
the same direction as the
handpath in the time it takes to
complete one such handpath.
Like antibend, this results in the
33

poi plane switching between being perpendicular and tangent to the handpath. Unlike
antibend, probend patterns tend to result in poi paths where the poi never reaches the
outside of the torus. This results in patterns that closely resemble inspin flowers in
traditional 2D flower spinning, but the poi will switch between a plane in front of and
behind the hand. These are the toroid equivalent of inspin in 2D spinning.​

Given this framework, the astute reader may have noticed that many of the rules governing how
the poi must move no longer apply to how a poi plane can move. Indeed, the most accurate
model we have for understanding the behavior of the poi plane in a toroid is the behavior of a
staff. With this in mind, we can easily understand the movement of the plane by updating our
formula for deriving petals with poi movement to now work for staff. Where 𝑑 is the number of
staff/plane beats per handpath completion, to get the number of 𝑝 petals, the equation will be
𝑝 = |2(1 − 𝑑)|. Keep this in mind as it will become very important very quickly!
a. Modeling Isobend Toroids
We will start with the easiest type of toroid to model: the isobend. Because this type of toroid is
closest to a perfect torus, we can apply the equations used to model a torus with a few minor
tweaks to produce the result we want. The traditional equation for producing a torus is usually
listed as such:7
𝑥 = (𝑅 + 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑦 = (𝑅 + 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑧 = 𝑟 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑢
Where t is equal to all values between 0 and 2π, u is also equal to all values between 0 and 2π,
R is the distance from the center of the torus to the center of its ring, and r is the radius of that
ring itself. Now, this at first looks like a vastly different equation from what we are used to
dealing with, but if we dive into it, we will find it is not so terribly different from what we are
already used to using. First, if we get rid of the (𝑅 + 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢) terms, we can easily see that the
resulting equation is very similar to what we already played with in our weaves section:
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑧 = 𝑟 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑢
So what is that extra term doing? If you notice the weaves equation we have separated out, you
may notice something odd about it: when we were playing in 2D land and x and y were the only
axes we needed to worry about, we had sin and cos working in tandem to give us circular
motion. When we add a z axis oscillation for weaves, we are adding an odd sin term that has no
7

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Torus

34

cos to balance it out. This does not matter as much with weaves because the z value is just
bouncing back and forth essentially along a straight line. But when we model a torus, we need
to be creating circles both along the x and y axes, as well as circles between the x and z axes
as well as the y and z axes. The term we removed to achieve the weave-like equation above is
the missing cos term that balances out the sin function on the z axis to give us a circle--and it
needs to be applied to both the x and y axis because we need to create a relationship both
between them and also individual between each of those axes and the z axis.
To make the torus equation easier to understand, I will
recontextualize it to look more similar to what we’re used to
dealing with so far:
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑢
Where t is equal to all values between 0 and 2π and u is also equal to all values between 0 and
2π. Just like in our previous poi equations, the first set of terms on the x and y axes govern the
movement of the hand. This equation produces the exact same result as the one I outlined
above for a torus, but arranges the pieces in a way that is more in line with what we need to
work with. Why are there two different variables that essentially do the same thing? Because to
draw a torus we’re drawing two different sets of circles. When we draw a toroid using poi, we
are only tracking a path along the surface of the torus, so u will be replaced by t.
Given this, we can graph the path for an isobend with 4 petals using the following equation:
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(4𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(4𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(4𝑡).

35

Here, we have what would look like a 4-petal antispin flower as seen from the top axis, but each
petal includes a single rotation in
the z-axis. An example of this
toroid being performed can be
seen here where forward and
back are treated as the z axis in
this graph. The terms that govern
the number of “petals” we get
with an isobend toroid changes
slightly as opposed to what we
are used to seeing with 2D
flowers. Now, the multiple of t
that we find inside the cos
functions on both the x and y axis
in addition to the multiple of t on
the sin function on the z axis are what controls the number of “petals” we wind up with. In this
case, the multiple is equal to the number of “petals” we want to see in the resulting pattern. As
noted above, petals is not the best term to describe the behavior of the poi relative to the
handpath in toroids. We will explore a better term in the flower structure section of this paper
under definitions.
An animation of how the poi tracks through this pattern can be found to the right.
b. Modeling Antibend Toroids
36

Antibend toroids are going to present a very different host of challenges to us. Where isobend
toroids are planar locked to always be oriented perpendicularly to the handpath, antibends for
the first time introduce the concept that the poi plane can turn in a different fashion, twisting up a
torus into bizarre and wonderful self-intersecting shapes. This is one of the most popular types
of toroids because it can be used to create shapes that leave a poi path that will appear similar
to a polygon when seen from edge-on due to the poi plane functioning more like a straight line
than a curve. This will also be the most diverse type of toroid we will explore as it presents
multiple opportunities to create a variety of different shapes.
To start, we will need to update our equation open up additional possibilities for how the poi
plane can rotate. Our equation now becomes:
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑓𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡)
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑓𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑑𝑡)
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑓𝑡)
Where f is the number of z-axis beats our pattern will have and d is the number of rotations the
poi plane will have per handpath. This equation will also change what we know about the
number of petals we are creating in a pattern. In isobend, because the poi plane is locked, the
number of “petals” is essentially just determined by the number of times the poi is rotated as the
plane goes around. For antibend, however, because the poi plane itself is rotating, we must for
the first time consider what the shape generated by rotating the plane will be in addition to the
number of beats the poi will have in the pattern.
For example, if we elect to display a full torus with three points, the equation will be

(

1

)

(

1

)

𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢)𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 2 𝑡 , 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑢)𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 2 𝑡 , 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑢 and it comes out looking
like this:

37

Which, when viewed from above comes out looking like a triangle with slightly rounded corners.
Now remember, this is just
the movement of the poi
plane. Unlike in this
example, the poi never
occupies all points in its
plane simultaneously, so
we must now assign a
given number of beats to
this pattern to see what
the resulting poi path will
become. One of the more
popular ways to perform
this pattern is to perform
an half beat for each rotation of the plane, resulting in a poi path that likewise resembles a

( (

1

)) (

1

)

triangle when seen from above, resulting in the equation 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠 1 2 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 2 𝑡 ,

( (

1

)) (

1

)

(

1

)

𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠 1 2 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 2 𝑡 , 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛 1 2 𝑡 .

38

Now, something looks a little off, and a view from the side will help us see what it is. Because
we are completing only 1.5 beats of the poi per handpath, the resulting poi path looks
incomplete.

One way to fix this is to complete two repetitions of the pattern. Given that for each handpath,
we are getting 1.5 poi beats, if we complete 2 handpaths we will get 3 poi beats, which because
39

it is a whole number should produce a more complete looking pattern for us. We can easily
perform this operation by setting t to equal all values between 0 and 4π, or completing two
repetitions.

Now we have a completed pattern where the poi path intersects itself at each corner of the
triangle. Viewed head-on, this pattern will appear to look very similar to a triangle, as it does in
this long exposure photograph where it is performed with a triquetra.8 Below is an animation of
how the poi tracks through this pattern.
For another popular antibend
toroid, we will model a
pentagram. This toroid is much
trickier! Pentagrams are
generated via antispin when the
1

poi completes − 1 2 beats for
each handpath, but a toroid will
be different because the poi’s
planes behave more like a staff
than a poi. In this case, we are
going to want the plane to
1

complete 4 of a rotation per
handpath to set a base plane
8

http://www.pinterest.com/pin/373728469049273942/

40

1

shape that is a 5-pointed star polygon. The poi, then, will need to complete 1 4 beats per

( (

1

)) (

1

)

handpath to create the proper pattern. Thus, our equation is 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠 1 4 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 4 𝑡 ,
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 +

( (

))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− )

1
𝑐𝑜𝑠 1 4 𝑡

(

)

1
1
𝑡 , 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛 1 4 𝑡 . As we learned with the triangle, when the poi
4

path has a number of beats that appears as a fraction, we have to perform multiple handpaths
1

to catch up to it and generate a complete pattern. Because that number is 4 in this case, we
need four handpaths to complete the pattern, so t is equal to all values between 0 and 8π.

Again, we get an antibend toroid pattern where the poi traces a path along the outside edge of
the torus, closely resembling a star polygon with straight edges and tight angles. An example of
this toroid being performed with a long exposure photograph can be viewed here.
Let us model one final toroid with two variations to close out this section and see if we can’t
derive a few conclusions about toroid behavior from these examples. Our last example will be
much simpler to model than either of our previous examples--this will be an antibend toroid with
four corners rather than three or five. Compared to our last two examples, the equation for a
four-pointed pattern is relatively simple. It will be 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡) with t again returning to being equal to all values
between 0 and 2π.

41

From above, this pattern looks not unlike a square or a diamond with slightly curved sides.

π

Because the angles at the corners of this pattern approach 90 degrees (or 2 if we are working
in radians), it is actually fairly difficult to accomplish this pattern with poi and maintain the angles
cleanly, so it is a habit among poi spinners who perform this pattern to include what are called
42

“grace” beats to stabilize the poi every quarter of the shape to prevent the pattern from looking a
mess. Fortunately, we can model the grace beats and not lose the overall integrity of our
1

equation. Because they require 1 2 beats per corner of the pattern, we just take the t multiplier
on our two cos functions on the x and y axes as well as our sin function on the z axis and
1

multiply it by 1 2 , resulting in 6 being our new multiplier for this term. The resulting equation is
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(6𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(6𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(6𝑡) and the graph looks
like this:

Those who have performed this pattern will instantly notice that something is wrong: the grace
beat is being performed on the sides of the pattern rather than the corners. Fortunately, this is
just a simple matter of changing the phasing of the pattern. We can accomplish this by now
adding π to 6t to shift the pattern of the poi beats a half a circle. The resulting equation is
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(6𝑡 + π))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(6𝑡 + π))𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(6𝑡 + π).

43

This path now looks like a cross between the 4-petal isobend we looked at in the last section
and the 4-corner antibend because in essence it is. At each corner we have a grace beat from
which we are able to jump to the next corner. This lesson on phasing the poi beats of an toroid
will again become important in the section on probend toroids. You’ll note, I’m accomplishing
this in a different fashion than I did in our section on modeling isolations in 2D. The reason for
this will become clear when I present an equation that includes variables to model each and
every pattern presented in this document.
The reader will note that unlike the antibend triangle and pentagram, the antibend square
required only one handpath to complete. This is just an interesting hiccup in the math--antibend
patterns with an odd number of points will always require multiple handpaths of an even number
to complete because each corner of the poi path reverses the direction of the poi. If you think of
the rotation of the poi as having two sides (you could think of it as when the poi is rotating “up”
vs “down” or in front of you vs behind you), the poi will return to the beginning of the handpath
traveling in the opposite direction it started in. Thus, to return the poi to its origin, the number of
handpaths needs to be doubled.
c. Modeling Probend Toroids
Like antibend toroids, probend toroids are also built on the notion that the poi plane rotates
more freely in relation to the handpath. In this case, the plane will rotate in the same direction as
the hand, but complete more than one rotation in the process. To give one such example, we
will model a probend pattern that will have 4 “petals”. To do this we will use the equation
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡))𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡) to create this very
44

odd-looking pattern:

It would be extremely difficult to perform this pattern given that a very rapid bend occurs at the
top and bottom of the pattern. If, however, we use the same trick we learned for changing the
phasing of an antibend with grace beats, we arrive at 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡 + π))𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡),
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑡 + π))𝑠𝑖𝑛(3𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝑡 + π) and get a much different result:

45

I will present this shape from a few other perspectives as well:

It may be difficult to make out from these perspectives, but this probend can be described as
consisting of a series of 4 arcs between petals where the petals then switch the plane of the poi
back and forth along the z axis. This is the least-explored and most difficult to understand type
of toroid and results in the opposite pattern as the antibend: in a probend, the poi travels a path
across only the inside surface of the torus. It is a difficult maneuver to perform cleanly, but there
are a few video examples of this type of toroid being performed, one of which can be found
here.
Now that we have viewed examples of all three types of toroids, we can set down a series of
variables and equations that are capable of describing any toroid pattern as well as set down
certain rules governing the relationships between the values of variables in said equations.
𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑐𝑡 + 𝑑))𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑓𝑡)
𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + (𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑐𝑡 + 𝑑))𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑓𝑡)
46

𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑐𝑡 + 𝑑)
Where c is the number of poi
beats in the overall pattern, d is
the phasing offset of the poi
path within the pattern and f is
the number of beats the poi
plane will complete per
handpath. To start making
sense of how these values
interrelate, let us start with f
because it will likely be the
most difficult variable to
comprehend. This is because f
now functions like a staff
rotating rather than a poi rotating and a staff has two ends instead of one. Now we derive the
number of petals 𝑝 in the equation with 𝑝 = 2 · |1 − 𝑓|. Or, if we’d like to think of antispin
flowers as having negative petals and inspin flowers positive petals, the equation will be
𝑝 = 2(1 − 𝑓). Which will be more useful to us because we can now solve the equation for 𝑓 in
order to find the value of 𝑓 when we know how many petals we are hoping to produce in our
𝑝

pattern. For example, if we wish to have a -3 petal pattern (triangle), we can use 𝑓 = 2 + 1 to
1

find 𝑓 =− 2 , exactly the number we used for our antibend triangle!
If instead we want to find the value of 𝑐 in a given equation, first we can go back to always
thinking of 𝑝 as being a positive number, but now the answer will depend on the type of toroid
we wish to create. If we are building an isobend and we know the number of petals 𝑝 we are
attempting to generate, 𝑐 = 𝑝. Easy as pie. If we are building either a probend or an antibend
𝑝

toroid without grace beats, 𝑐 = 2 . Finally, to create an antibend toroid with grace beats, we use
𝑐=

3𝑝
.
2

8. A Generalized Equation for Modeling Poi Patterns in this Paper
Given all the different equations we have so far encountered in our study of poi patterns, we can
now set down all the variables and equations we would need to model any one of them. This
equation is as follows:
𝑥 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑦 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑧 = 𝑑(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑜𝑡 + 𝑠))
This equation may look complex, but it involves no variable assignments we haven’t worked
47

with already. One question you may be asking is why I have skipped certain series of letters--the
short answer is that my graphing program has preset values for e, i, j, and r such that I cannot
override them in the program. To ensure consistency with my diagrams, I have opted to write out
the equation to avoid using any such letters.
Let’s dive into each variable so we can understand exactly what it means. For a, this is the
radius of the core handpath of a third-order motion (almost always 1) or it is 0 if the pattern we
intend to produce is not a third-order motion. For b, this is the radius of the handpath for most
flowers and the second center of rotation for a third-order motion or it is 0 if we intend to
produce a simple weave. For c, this is the phasing of the poi path and will be either 1 or -1
depending on whether we are producing a fractal flower or isolation in 2D spinning. For d, this is
the number that tells us if our pattern will utilize a sin function on its z axis (in the case of
weaves and most toroids, this value will be 1, for all other patterns 0). For variable m, this is the
variable that determines how many downbeats the handpath pattern has in a third-order motion
or how many beats the handpath has in a complex weave. For n, we have the number of poi
beats per handpath in 2D spinning as well as the number of beats the poi plane completes per
handpath in toroids. For o, we determine the number of z-axis beats a pattern has (in 2D
spinning, this number will be 0). In toroids, p determines how many beats the poi path will have
in the x and y axes--in this case 𝑝 = 𝑜, but for all 2D spinning and weaves, 𝑝 = 0(and yes,
math geeks, this variable is arguably redundant given that we could effectively replace c with it
to accomplish much the same thing, but I am trying to keep as much consistency as possible
between the equations in this document). Finally, for s we have the phasing of the poi path in
toroid patterns (if the pattern is not a toroid, this number is always 0).
Wow! That’s a lot. To help make sense of it, I have included a table below with sample values
for these variables to create many of the patterns we’ve already worked with.
Flowers:
Triquetra
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
𝑛 =− 2
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

2-petal Inspin
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
𝑛=3
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

Isolation
𝑎=0
1
𝑏= 2

Triquetra Fractal Flower

Inspin-inspin 2-petal

𝑐 =− 1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
𝑛=1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

Third-order Motions:
Zan’s Diamond

48

𝑎=1
𝑏 =− 1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚 =− 3
𝑛=5
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

𝑎=1
𝑏=1
𝑐 =− 1
𝑑=0
𝑚 =− 2
𝑛=4
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

𝑎=1
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚=3
𝑛=5
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

3-beat Weave
𝑎=0
𝑏=0
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛=3
𝑜=1
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

Triquetra Weave
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=2
𝑛 =− 4
𝑜=1
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

3-petal Antibend
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
1
𝑛 =− 4

4-petal Probend
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛=3
𝑜=2
𝑝=𝑜
𝑠= π

Weaves:
2-beat Weave
𝑎=0
𝑏=0
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛=2
𝑜=1
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
Toroids:
4-petal Isobend
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛=1
𝑜=4
𝑝=𝑜
𝑠=0

1

𝑜=12
𝑝=𝑜
𝑠=0

Given these values, you should be able to go back through any pattern already mentioned in
this paper and be able to produce the graph associated with it by inferring the values of each
variable in it. That does not mean that we are done, however. There are still two types of
patterns we have not discussed, though neither requires significant revision of the equations
we’ve laid out. Those two types of patterns are linear extensions and composite patterns.
49

9. Linear Extensions
Given much of the work we have just completed, linear extensions will come as incredibly
simple patterns. They haven’t been mentioned yet because I rarely have need of modeling them
as generally speaking they are used as stepping stones to more complex patterns that have
already been described in this paper. We can model one easily with the following equation:
x=sint+sint, y=cost. That’s it. It results in the following graph:

The handpath here is hidden by the x axis, but literally is a straight horizontal line that reaches
for -1 to 1. You’ll note, this move was accomplished by using different values for our previous
variable b depending up whether it’s on the x axis or the y axis. Again, I think these patterns are
elementary enough they don’t need to be included in our universal equation, but if the reader
prefers to have a complete model, they can do so using the following equation:
𝑥 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏0(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑦 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏1(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑧 = 𝑑(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑜𝑡 + 𝑠))
All other variables remain the same, but now 𝑏0is used to denote the radius of the handpath
along the x axis and 𝑏1is used to denote the radius of the handpath along the y axis. For the
graph above, 𝑏0 = 1, 𝑏1 = 0.
10. Composite Patterns
50

We have now discussed a suite of different poi patterns, but have yet to talk about what
happens when they are combined together in different ways. After all, nobody wants to just spin
the same pattern over and over again forever! In addition, there are examples both obvious as
well as subtle of patterns we commonly take for granted that are the product of changing a
pattern as we spin that can be mistaken for patterns in and of themselves. To distinguish
between these types, I’m utilizing the terms elementary pattern and composite pattern.
First, a pattern is any poi pattern in which the poi and hand complete a movement over time t in
which they depart from and return to the positions both occupied at 𝑡 = 0.
An elementary pattern is any pattern for which every variable in the universal equation outlined
above has been assigned a value and the path of the poi and hand has returned to the position
and direction of the origin of the pattern. Most elementary patterns can be recorded between t
values of at least 0 and 2π, though some patterns may require higher t values to complete.
A composite pattern is any pattern that is created via the transition of one incomplete
elementary pattern to one or more additional elementary patterns. In other words, though poi
and hand depart from and eventually return to their positions at 𝑡 = 0, they may also at any
point switch to a different set of variables for the universal equation before returning to the
positions they occupied at 𝑡 = 0. (I am indebted to Alien Jon for introducing me to the term and
its applications).
Given these requirements, every single pattern we have examined so far in this paper qualifies
as an elementary pattern. We have yet to work with composite patterns, however, as they add
an additional degree of complexity. We will investigate three such types of composite patterns:
CAPs, stalls, and antibend toroids with grace beats.
a. CAPs
CAP stands for Continuous Assembly Pattern, a type of movement originally identified by
Damien Boisbouvier based upon a move seen in an old Yuta performance video.9 He has done
considerable work on the topic of fleshing out this concept10 but fundamentally defines it as a
single hand and poi performing continuously elements of two or more elementary patterns in
series. This definition adheres closely to what we’ve already laid out here, but Damien’s
approach differs slightly in that he models his patterns using polar instead of Cartesian
coordinates, meaning that he can model a CAP with a single equation while for us it is more
easy to assemble a CAP out of two or more equations.
The most commonly performed type of CAP is that performed in the original Yuta video,
9

http://www.homeofpoi.com/community/ubbthreads.php/topics/836555/Yuta_moves_analysis.html
http://www.homeofpoi.com/community/ubbthreads.php/topics/891193/What_are_CAP_s.html

10

51

frequently referred to as the C-CAP. In our system, it can be thought of as half of an extension
combined with half of a 4-petal antispin flower. But how do we model this? Well, it will take two
copies of our universal equation to do so, but we would set out the following variable
assignments:

Side 1
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
𝑛 =− 3
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

Side 2
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚 =− 1
𝑛 =− 1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0

Where side 1 is assigned to all values of t between 0 and π and side 2 is assigned to all values
of t between π and 2π. In other words, we are breaking two different elementary patterns in half
and sticking them together. For simplicity’s sake in graphing these equations, I have set the
variable t to only equal those values between 0 and π and assigned a second variable, u, to be
assigned to the values between π and 2π.

To those of us who have been spinning the past few years, this is a very familiar pattern indeed.
We can also see easily how it is created by taking parts of two different equations and
52

combining them together. One obvious question might be to ask why m and n have both been
assigned values of -1 in the second equation. The reason for this is that it means that this part
of the equation will track backwards. Just as we know that when m is a positive number and n is
a negative number, we get antispin (because a negative n forces the poi to rotate in the
opposite direction as a positive number m for the hand), assigning a negative value to m for the
second half of the equation means that the hand is turning in the opposite direction as the first
side, thus retracing the same path. You will note that between the two equations, the poi does
not actually change direction--only the hand does. The poi, however, does change the number
of downbeats it completes in relation to the number of downbeats the hand performs.
b. Stalls
If one is looking for a solution that is just “good enough,” stalls are relatively easy to write
equations for. They can simply be taken as a fraction of a flower that completes only to the tip of
a given flower petal. This will not precisely model the behavior of stalls, but it will provide
opportunities to easily model things like plane breaks. One such example can be obtained by
compositing together the following two equations:
Side 1: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡), 𝑧 = 0
Side 2: 𝑥 = 0, 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡), 𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡)
To get this result:

This can be treated as a plane shift between two atomic plane orientations--perhaps wall vs
53

horizontal, for instance. While this is a workable solution, it does not model what occurs in a stall
very accurately. To that end, stalls have been one of the most difficult things I have ever
attempted to model with trigonometric equations--I still don’t believe I have found a good
solution to doing so. A few years ago, Charlie Cushing and I engaged in a long study on how
stalls could be effectively modeled using these equations and came up with two primary
approaches--both are difficult to write out, comprehend, and predict the properties of. One
approach was to add an additional cyclical function to the hand’s t term in both the x and y axes,
effectively making the hand move along its path faster in some places than in others. This
changes the shape of the flower petals just slightly to bring them to a point rather than rounded
edges. The other approach is to effectively freeze the hand on the penultimate flower petal till
the poi can come around to the axis along which it will be stalling.
It is this latter style that slow motion studies of videos reveals creates the cleanest stalls and
which will be demonstrated here. In this particular case, a stall consists of three parts: ¾ of a
4-petal antispin flower so that the tip of the third petal is reached, then half a static spin with the
hand immobile before finishing the handpath with the poi completing ¼ of a linear isolation to
take it straight out the axis upon which it is stalling. The Byzantine equations that describe this
series of actions are:
Side 1: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 3𝑡), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 3𝑡)
Side 2: 𝑥 =− 1 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑢), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑢)
Side 3: 𝑥 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑣 + 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑣), 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑣 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑣)
Where t is equal to all values between 0 and
v is equal to all values between

3π
2

3π
π
3π
, u is equal to all values between 2 and 2 , and
2

and 2π.

54

While this composite pattern may at first appear quite bizarre, the most noticeable quality of it
when performed in real life is the cleanliness of the stall along the y axis. To put it mildly,
modeling stalls in this fashion, while relatively accurate, can be very difficult and might be more
work than is worth it. Nonetheless, if the reader is up for undertaking this challenge, the method
outlined here will produce the desired result.
c. Composite Toroids
One of the benefits of spinning toroids, especially in antibend, is that
they produce straight lines rather than the curves we are accustomed
to seeing when spinning poi. Because of this, we are able to generate
patterns with poi that would otherwise be impossible. One such
example is the unicursal hexagram, a star polygon that, should we
attempt to perform it as a standard poi flower, would result in alternating
between regions of antispin and extension such that the intention of the
pattern would be completely lost. This is due to the fact that unlike most
other star polygons, the unicursal hexagram is an irregular polygon11,
meaning that each of its sides is not equally long, resulting in angles of different sizes that
alternate regularly throughout the figure. Because the figure can be drawn with straight lines,
however, it can be produced as a toroid, but not as one that meets the requirements of an
elementary pattern.
Producing a unicursal hexagram requires six separate equations that all interlink with each
11

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irregular_polygon

55

other. I won’t lie, modeling this results in a less than ideal result due to the fact that each
segment has a significantly different curve from the previous one. It is likely possible to write a
single equation that could graph the entire shape, but said equation would be highly complex
and take quite a long time to puzzle out. When we physically spin this shape, we are
automatically making constant adjustments to make each segment match up to the next. In lieu
of this, I offer up the following six equations that together graph out a unicursal hexagram in
toroid form. Please note: in producing this shape I am doing so with the radius of the handpath
dilated down to 0 as this is the most common arrangement for performing this particular shape.
Segment 1:

( ( )) (
)
𝑦 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠( 𝑡))𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑡 + π)
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛( 𝑡)
9

1

9
6

1
2

𝑥 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 6 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 2 𝑡 + π
9
6

Segment 2:

(
)
𝑦 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑤))𝑐𝑜𝑠(0𝑤 +
)
𝑥 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑤))𝑠𝑖𝑛 0𝑤 +

2π
3
2π
3

𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑤)
Segment 3:

( ( )) ( )
𝑦 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠( 𝑡))𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑡)
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛( 𝑡)
9

1

9
6

1
2

𝑥 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 6 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 − 2 𝑡
9
6

Segment 4:

( ( )) ( )
𝑦 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠(− 𝑡))𝑐𝑜𝑠( 𝑡)
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡)
9

1

9
6

1
2

𝑥 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 − 6 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝑡
9
6

Segment 5:

(
)
𝑦 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑤))𝑐𝑜𝑠(0𝑤 −
)
𝑥 = (𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑤))𝑠𝑖𝑛 0𝑤 −

2π
3
2π
3

𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑤)
Segment 6:

( (

9

)) (

1

)

𝑥 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 − 6 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝑡 − π

56

( ( )) (
𝑧 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(− 𝑡)
9

1

)

𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 − 6 𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝑡 − π
9
6

Where 𝑡 is equal to all values between 0 and

2π
3

and 𝑤 is equal to all values between 0 and π.

This produces the following graph:

It is neither as pretty nor as clean as we may prefer, but it does contain all our essential
segments and they do all interconnect. I apologize for the piecemeal assembly of this particular
pattern, but it took a lot of trial and error to get all the segments to connect properly. Consider
this an open invitation to the reader to find the equation that would give us a cleaner version of
this pattern. A photograph of this pattern being performed can be viewed here.

C. Defining Elementary Poi Patterns
Now that we’ve been presented with several different types of poi tricks that can all be modeled,
we’re going to take this capability a step further by utilizing the ranges of variables we have
found for each particular classification of tricks and using them as a diagnostic by which we can
determine whether a particular poi pattern fits within this classification. Each variable we have
examined can be expressed in lay terms such that any trick classified by the ranges of its
variables can also be described in language the common person can comprehend.
For example, if we take the variable values for a triquetra as outlined in the universal equation
section above:
57

For:
𝑥 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑦 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑧 = 𝑑(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑜𝑡 + 𝑠))
𝑎=0
𝑏=1
𝑐=1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
𝑛 =− 2
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
We can then translate this series of variables into lay language by stating it is a pattern created
by having the hand travel around a circular pattern 1 poi length in radius as the poi completes 2
beats rotating in the opposite direction. Simple. For variables that are not currently in use, there
is no reason we need to express them in this context, they will only lead to clutter. With this
approach in mind, I humbly submit the following variable ranges and accompanying vernacular
to classify the poi tricks we have examined so far in this paper.
1. Flowers
In this case, I am using flowers as an umbrella term to describe any and all of the 2D patterns
that we examined above, including subsets of inspin and antispin flowers as well as the poi unit
circle as a subfamily.
Variable Range:
𝑎=0
0 < |𝑏| < 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
|𝑐| = 1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
|𝑛| ≥ 1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
Vernacular Description:
Flowers are the family of moves in which the poi and hand both rotate in the same two axes, the
hand creating a circle that has a radius greater than zero and ultimately bounded by the
58

armspan of the performer while the poi completes one or more rotations in either the same or
opposite direction as the hand.
a. Petals vs Lobes/Antilobes
A major point of contention in discussing flowers has been the use of the term “petal,” for which
no formal definition has yet been set down. It has been used both to connotate the enclosed
loops that are produced when the poi completes more than one rotation in relation to the hand
in either direction as well as regions of a flower in which the poi and hand are moving in
opposite directions. Not surprisingly, this leads to a great deal of confusion as to how many
petals there are in smaller antispin patterns like cateyes.
I am going to avoid that debate entirely by shifting my vocabulary. Rather than trying to reframe
the concept of a petal to be easily diagnosable and court controversy over the resulting
definition, I’m going to embrace a vocabulary developed by Alien Jon and explored in greater
detail by myself and Charlie Cushing to shift the conversation over the structure of flowers to
focus on the movement of the poi vs the movement of the hand.

In this framework, at the tips of the structures we traditionally regard as “petals,” the movement
vectors of the poi and the hand are parallel, but pointed in opposite directions. These regions
were originally referred to as loops by Alien Jon, but lately we have been favoring the
vocabulary Charlie developed12, referring to these regions as “antilobes.” At the opposite
extreme are regions in which the vectors of the poi and hand are parallel, but are pointed in the
same direction. These regions (originally dubbed arcs by Alien Jon) are called lobes in Charlie’s
vocabulary. It is important to note that these states do not exist in binary--any flower will exhibit
gradients between the two extremes wherein the movement vectors of the hand and poi twist
12

https://www.facebook.com/groups/113059425470308/permalink/456352241141023/?stream_ref=2

59

around in different directions before settling to parallel in either direction, thus producing a lobe
or an antilobe. To put it simply:
Lobes are regions of a flower where the hand and poi are moving in parallel as well as the
same direction.
Antilobes are regions of a flower where the hand and poi are moving in parallel but opposite
directions.
With this classification in mind, all flower patterns display equivalent numbers of lobes and
antilobes with two exceptions: isolations and extensions. In the former case, the poi and hand
are eternally locked in a state where their movement vectors are parallel and moving in opposite
directions (essentially, and isolation is an endless lobe) and in the latter case, the poi and hand
are locked in a state where their vectors are parallel and moving in the same direction (thus, an
extension is an endless antilobe).
Framing flower movements in this fashion is helpful because given the fact that all flowers
feature these regions, they can be thought of as transition points between different flowers. As
long as two flowers share the position of a lobe or antilobe, one can easily shift between them.
b. Antispin and Inspin
With the structure of our flowers now defined, it is time to define the difference between antispin
and inspin. Fortunately, this is a trivial matter both mathematically and in the vernacular given
that antispin and inspin flowers have long been defined in terms of whether the poi spins in the
same or opposite direction as the hand. Below are the variable values that make up these
definitions.
Antispin:
𝑎=0
0 < |𝑏| < 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
|𝑐| = 1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
𝑛 ≤− 1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
Inspin:
𝑎=0
0 < |𝑏| < 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
|𝑐| = 1
𝑑=0
60

𝑚=1
𝑛≥1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
One logical question based upon these equations is why |𝑛| ≥ 1. The short answer is because
gravity exists. When |𝑛| has values of less than 1, we encounter regions of a pattern in which
the hand would have to have the capacity to push the poi upwards against the pull of gravity or
straight sideways, a feat that is impossible for poi because the tether is not a rigid structure.
When using a rigid prop like a club or a staff, however, n can be equal to any value at all.
Vernacular Description:
Antispin flowers are a subset of flowers (and thus subject to the restrictions laid out in the
previous section) wherein the poi rotates in the opposite direction of the hand and completes
one or more beats per handpath. Inspin flowers are a subset of flowers wherein the poi rotates
in the same direction as the hand and completes one or more beats per handpath.
c. Unit Circle Patterns
Unit circle patterns are a specialized subset of flowers that incorporate both inspin and antispin
patterns but set the handpath at ½ a poi length in radius. Technically we could include
absolutely any pattern with said handpath in this family, but for the purposes of this paper I will
adhere to the restrictions outlined by Alien Jon when he originally defined this family as only the
patterns possible in this framework that have a single poi downbeat.13 With that in mind, here is
the mathematical definition:
𝑎=0
1
𝑏= 2
|𝑐| = 1
𝑑=0
𝑚=1
|𝑛| = 1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
Thus, the acceptable values for both c and n are ± 1, which covers all possible phasings of unit
circle patterns, from extensions, to isolations, to both vertical and horizontal cateyes.
Vernacular Description:
13

http://techpoi.tribe.net/thread/7d1509cc-1f2b-4448-b2a5-f1ef100ae18e

61

Unit circle patterns are a subset of flowers wherein the radius of the handpath is equivalent to
half the length of the poi and the poi completes a single beat for each handpath.
Believe it or not, this simple description actually covers every possible unit circle pattern.
2. Third-order Motions
As seen previously in this paper, third-order motions require an additional center of rotation to
be generated, so they will also require an expanded set of variables to be fully realized. Given
this, we can realize all possible third-order motion patterns with the following variable values:
𝑎>0
|𝑏| > 0
𝑎 + |𝑏| ≤ 4 (again, depending upon the armspan of the performer)
|𝑐| = 1
𝑑=0
|𝑚| ≥ 1
|𝑛| ≥ 1
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
Deciphering this equation, we find that now a and b together must equal the total armspan of
the performer rather than b being solely responsible for carrying this value. Because b can be
phased as a positive or negative number, we take the absolute value of it in formulating this
equation. Similarly, now that the handpath can have multiple downbeats relative to the “virtual”
handpath at the core of this movement, it is assigned the same possible range of values as the
poi.
Vernacular Description:
Third-order motions are the family of poi patterns wherein both the poi and the hand rotate
along the same pair of axes, but in such a way as to simulate 3 different sources of rotation.
While the hand follows a path analogous to a flower pattern14, the poi completes 1 or more beat
for each completion of this flower pattern in either the same or opposite direction to the rotation
of the hand.
a. Fractal Flowers
Fortunately, we already outlined many of the necessary concepts for defining this subset of
third-order motions and can reach back to our work there to set the relationships necessary for
14

I realize it’s annoying to use a recursive definition like this, but I’m trying to save space.

62

our variables.
𝑎>0
|𝑏| > 0
𝑎 + |𝑏| ≤ 4 (again, depending upon the armspan of the performer)
𝑐 =− 𝑏
𝑑=0
|𝑚| ≥ 1

(

2

𝑛 =𝑚 −

−𝑚
𝑚

)

𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
In this special case of third-order motions, we want to establish that the phasing of the poi
pattern is opposite that of the handpath in addition to setting the poi beats to be hand beats
squared, but in the opposite direction as the hand’s movement. To achieve this, we assign to it a
positive or negative value opposite that of m, the hand’s direction of movement and number of
beats.
Vernacular Description:
Fractal flowers are the subset of third-order motions wherein the number of poi beats is
equivalent to the number of hand beats times itself and phased opposite to the handpath.
b. Triquetra Expansions
Again, we explored this idea in depth before, so assigning our variables should be relatively
easy. Like fractal flowers, we are deriving our value of n (poi beats) from m (hand beats) but
now we are doing so in a linear rather than exponential fashion.
𝑎>0
|𝑏| > 0
𝑎 + |𝑏| ≤ 4 (again, depending upon the armspan of the performer)
𝑐 =− 𝑏
𝑑=0
𝑚 ≤− 1
𝑛 = |𝑚 − 2|
𝑜=0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
In this case, our work is simplified because we know both that triquetra expansions have to be
antispin-antispin (and thus, that m must be a negative value) and that for each beat of m we are
adding 2 poi beats n (and that since the poi is rotating opposite the hand, that this value must be
positive).

63

Vernacular Description:
Triquetra expansions are a subset of third-order motions wherein the hand follows the handpath
of an antispin flower while the poi completes 2 beats for each beat of the handpath while
phased opposite the handpath.
3. Manifolds
Manifolds are a word usually not applied to poi except in specialized circles. Here, I am going to
use the term in an umbrella fashion to apply literally to every single possible 3D pattern that can
be produced with poi. Thus, it will apply to both simple and complex weaves, body tracers, and
toroids. Think of flowers as covering all 2D poi movement and manifolds as covering all 3D poi
movement. With this much ground to cover, the possible ranges of the variables will actually be
pretty boring at this stage.
For:
𝑥 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑦 = (𝑎 · 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑡) + 𝑏(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚𝑡)) + 𝑐(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑛𝑡))(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑝 + 𝑠)
𝑧 = 𝑑(𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑜𝑡 + 𝑠))
𝑎≥0
|𝑏| ≥ 0
𝑎 + |𝑏| ≤ 4 (depending on the armspan of the performer)
𝑐 =± 1
𝑑>0
𝑚≥1
|𝑛| ≥ 1
𝑜>0
𝑝≥0
0 ≤ 𝑠 ≤ 2π
This means that for the first time, we can have a range of values available for every variable.
One will note, however, that there is no pattern we have explored in the course of this paper that
does include a value for each variable. Breaking this down, we see once again that a and b
together are limited by the performer’s armspan, that the phasing of the poi can have two
different values, and that for the first time we can start playing around with the poi spinning in all
three dimensions thanks to possible values of d, o, and s. Given the multitude of possibilities
that can emerge from all these different possible variable values, I am going to keep the
description of this umbrella term as simple as possible.
Vernacular Description:
Manifolds are a family of poi moves in which the movement of the poi and hands together result
in a poi path that travels through all three dimensions.

64

That’s it. That covers everything we’re about to look at.
a. Weaves
Our first subfamily of manifolds will also be the easiest to define with its variable ranges. I’m
going to include both simple and complex weaves in the variable ranges we will define. This
likely is one of the reasons that weaves are among the first tricks that poi spinners learn.
𝑎≥0
|𝑏| ≥ 0
𝑎 + |𝑏| ≤ 4 (depending on the armspan of the performer)
𝑐 =± 1
𝑑>0
𝑚≥1
𝑛 ≥ 2𝑜
𝑜>0
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
In this case, we are shutting down p and s values because we’re not dealing with a toroid. We’re
also ensuring that that we have at least 2 poi beats for every oscillation of the hand across the z
axis given that I’ve never heard of a ½ beat weave.
Vernacular Description:
Weaves are a subfamily of manifolds wherein the poi completes multiple rotations in the x and y
axes, bending between parallel planes by the hand dragging the poi back and forth across the z
axis in the time it takes the hand to return to its origin.
Please note: as we discussed in the section modeling weaves, this covers everything from
3-beat weaves to corkscrews, thread-the-needles, windmills, barrel rolls, and countless other
moves to distinguish between which we would need to define the location of the poi relative to
the body and include the timing and direction between the two poi. This is outside the scope of
this paper but will hopefully be included in a follow-up.
b. Body Tracers
Body tracers are thankfully even more simple to set the variables for than weaves were. We can
actually copy most of our variable values from flowers to achieve this result with only minor
tweaks to our z axis terms.
𝑎=0
0 < |𝑏| < 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
|𝑐| = 1
65

𝑑=1
𝑚=1
|𝑛| ≥ 1
𝑜=1
𝑝=0
𝑠=0
Here, the only variable values that have changed at all from our flower values are the values for
d and o. These two variables in effect give us a single oscillation along the z axis. Now, one may
look at these variable values and state that they fall within the range of values we’ve defined for
weaves--and you would be absolutely right. It has been noted that 3-beat weaves can also be
conceptualized as 2-lobe inspin flowers performed as body tracers with the radius of the
handpath reduced to near 0. With this in mind, our vernacular definition can lean heavily on our
definition of weaves.
Vernacular Description:
Body tracers are a specialized subset of weaves wherein the handpath completes a rotation
along any two pairs of axes while the poi completes 1 or more beats bent between planes
parallel to one pair of the handpath’s axes.
c. Toroids
Our final set of elementary patterns, toroids will require the most diverse us of variable values
we have yet seen, including for the first time the use of both p and s. In theory we could also
turn toroids into weaves by giving a value to a, but again, it is outside the bounds of what this
paper hopes to achieve.
𝑎=0
0 ≤ 𝑏 ≤ 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
|𝑛| ≥ 1
𝑜≥0
𝑝=𝑜
0 ≤ 𝑠 < 2π
Now there is only one variable in our model for which there is no value at all. Amazingly, the
majority of our variables have scarcely from the body tracer model with two significant shifts:
now p has been locked to the value of o, meaning it is now p and o that determine the number
of lobes in the resulting pattern. Also, we have for the first time established a value for s. Given
that s is the variable that determines the overall phasing of the poi path within the pattern, it’s
silly if it is to be used to allow it to be either 0 or 2π given that either value would in effect cancel
out the effects of tweaking the phasing of the pattern.

66

You’ll note I am also using the term lobe to apply to structures that appear within toroids, despite
the fact that in the most rigid sense they don’t fit the definition of lobes that I included in the
section on the structure of flowers. The problem is compounded by the fact that with toroids
there are two different possible points of reference from which structures analogous to lobes
and antilobes can be derived. For instance, are we discussing the lobes produced by the
rotation of the poi plane or by the path of the poi across said rotating plane? The answer can
change depending on the type of toroid we are describing given that if we follow the movement
of the plane, an isobend seems analogous to an extension, producing an endless lobe. To
complicate matters, the poi can complete multiple beats within an isobend, creating patterns
that when viewed from head-on can strongly resemble both lobes and antilobes. For both
antibends and probends, however, it is fairly easy to produce patterns in which the plane rotates
in a way that produces multiple lobes and antilobes and then assign each lobe its own poi beat
to arrive at patterns that are able to assign these definitions to both the shape created by the
rotating poi plane as well as the resulting poi plane.
So how to talk about lobes and antilobes in toroids in an internally consistent way? Honestly,
there really isn’t one. The best we can hope to do is define the type of toroid and then treat its
lobes/antilobes as unique situations.
For isobend toroids, given that they are analogous to extensions, we can reasonably say that
they lack antilobe structures but define their lobes as the regions in which the poi crosses the
plane of the handpath traveling in the positive direction of the z axis.
We can, however use the same definitions of lobes and antilobes interchangeably between
antibend and probend toroids. For these two types:
Toroid Lobes are regions in which the plane of the poi aligns tangent to the handpath.
Toroid Antilobes are regions in which the plane of the poi aligns perpendicular to the handpath.
Utilizing these definitions provide us a credible way to talk about the structure of toroids so that
analogous structures between toroids and flowers are referred to with the same vocabulary. This
means that just like with flowers, antibend and probend toroids display an equivalent number of
lobes to antilobes while isobend toroids display only lobes--just like extensions in flowers.
Vernacular Description:
Toroids are a family of manifolds wherein the hand completes a rotation in any two axes while
the poi completes multiple rotations in all three pairs of axes by rotating the plane of the poi’s
rotation on an axis perpendicular to the plane of the the handpath.
With that in mind, we can define the three subsets of toroids as such:
67

i. Isobend Toroids
Fortunately, isobends require only minor tweaks to our previous toroid equation and in the end
simplify the equation slightly.
𝑎=0
0 ≤ 𝑏 ≤ 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛=1
𝑜≥1
𝑝=𝑜
𝑠=0
That’s it! The only variable we really need to worry about here is o, which simply defines how
many antilobes are produced in the pattern.
Vernacular description:
Isobend toroids are a subset of toroids wherein the plane of the poi completes a single rotation
per handpath and the poi may complete one or more beats in the course of a single handpath.
ii. Antibend Toroids
For antibend toroids, we will have to set our poi plane rotating in the opposite direction as the
handpath.
𝑎=0
0 ≤ 𝑏 ≤ 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛<0
𝑜 = |1 − 𝑛|
𝑝=𝑜
𝑠=0
By setting n to be a number less than zero, we are setting it to rotate in the opposite direction as
the handpath, whereas we can derive the value of o (the number of x, y, and z oscillations for
the poi) from two equations we outlined earlier, where we can derive the number of lobes u from
n with 𝑢 = 2(1 − 𝑛) and the number of x, y, and z oscillations from u with the equation
2(1−𝑛)
𝑜 = || 2 ||, which simplifies to 𝑜 = |1 − 𝑛|.

68

Vernacular Description:
Antibend toroids are a subset of toroids wherein the poi plane rotates in the opposite direction
as the handpath and the poi completes as many beats as the number of lobes that result from
the poi plane’s rotation.
iii. Probend Toroids
Our final toroid type, probend toroids will only require minor tweaks to our antibend equations to
switch the direction of the poi plane rotation and the phasing of the resulting poi pattern.
𝑎=0
0 ≤ 𝑏 ≤ 4 (depending on the performer’s poi and their armspan)
𝑐=1
𝑑=1
𝑚=1
𝑛>1
𝑜 = |1 − 𝑛|
𝑝=𝑜
𝑠= π
That’s it! The value for n has now become a positive number greater than 1 to ensure we are
not modeling an isobend, but aside from that no changes are necessary to our value for o.
We’ve changed the phasing of the pattern by setting s to phase the pattern halfway off (π is ½ of
2π, the number of radians in a complete circle).
Vernacular Description:
Probend toroids are a subset of toroids wherein the poi plane completes multiple rotations in the
same direction and amount of time as a single handpath. The poi completes a number of beats
equivalent to the number of lobes that result from the poi plane’s rotation.

D. Conclusions
Here you are at the end--congratulations, you made it! You now know most of what I do about
poi math. When I first started working on poi from a mathematical perspective, I had no idea
both how far down that particular rabbit hole I was going to wind up exploring, nor the diversity
of movement I was going to be able to describe with it. While we’ve covered a lot of ground in
this paper, there are clearly many different possible variable values and combinations that have
not been addressed in the course of this paper that may yield interesting results. We have
barely scratched the surface on the hand moving in all three dimensions and modeling
composite patterns is still in its infancy. There are scores of opportunities to expand and flesh
out this model to describe a host of additional movements.
69

One great uncrossed frontier is the modeling of weaves using trig as it requires tracking the
phasing of the poi in multiple axes and how the poi moves around obstacles to create its final
path. The litany of weave-based inside moves and how they vary depending on the phasing of
the poi within the pattern is another area ripe for exploration and modeling.
For now, I hope the reader has learned something new or at the very least received some
moments of entertainment from reading this paper. It wound up being a vastly larger
undertaking than I’d originally expected, but one I have not been able to put down nor truly
focus on anything else while it lay incomplete. It is the longest written work I’ve produced in my
life, so I hope it winds up being useful to someone other than myself at some point.
If you have any questions, comments, or corrections, please feel free to email me at
drex@drexfactor.com. I welcome feedback both positive and negative as well as the opportunity
to correct any mistakes I might have made in the multiple insomnia-fueled nights that led to the
completion of this document.
Cheers.

E. Thanks and Acknowledgements
The one and only reason I have any shred of a reason to call myself a mathematician, hobby or
otherwise, and by extension this paper exists due to a short but patient lesson from the one and
only Adam Dipert. Those ten minutes spent learning the basics of modeling poi with trig
functions literally changed my life from that of an artist who believed his entire life he was bad at
math to an individual who now explores advanced math concepts for fun. It is often said we
have little comprehension of the footprint we leave in this world--Adam, you may be a little guy,
but the footprint you’re leaving is that of a giant. Thank you, thank you, a million times thank
you!
It’s likely I would have forgotten most of what I’d learned from Adam had I not had the
opportunity to practice my knowledge of the math through writing a program to model poi with
Will Ruddick during my stay with him in Kenya. Teaching poi on the streets of Mombasa while
we wrote that program at night is entirely too much awesome for any single human being to get
to claim they got to participate in in one lifetime. Will made it possible for me to test my
understanding of the math in visual form that radically changed the way I conceptualized poi. In
addition, he’s an amazing human that is doing fantastic work raising people in Kenya out of
poverty through the use of local currencies. If you are reading this, you should visit
http://koru.or.ke/bangla and learn how Will is changing lives while I spin balls on strings.
As I explored the math more deeply over the course of many years, I could ask for no better
partner in crime than Charlie Cushing. We learned and explored together over phone calls,
emails, video chats, exchanging Python programs over nips of scotch (I guarantee I am making
70

our exchanges sound vastly classier than they truly were). Every curious mind should be so
lucky as to find a partner who matches or exceeds their facilities, curiosity, and drive to push
forward. Thank you for the most engaging moments of my spinning life, old friend :)
I would be remiss if I did not credit the original master of poi theory as well, Alien Jon Everett, for
his inspiration, wonderful suggestions, and pioneering work expanding the vocabulary of the poi
world. The language and concepts he pioneered are integral to the DNA of this paper. My
understanding of poi owes you a debt I shall never be able to repay, my friend.
I would also like to thank Damien Boisbouvier for his work on CAPs and third-order motions. In
many ways I believe we’ve been working on parallel tracks for years and again, the concepts
Damien has pioneered are also deeply ingrained in the DNA of this paper.
Thanks are also in order to Jonathan Alvarez, whose post to Poi Chat on Facebook15 asking if
the definitions of poi moves were available anywhere on the web was the catalyst for the writing
of this paper. I hope I have made some progress in addressing the need Jonathan identified.
Also, I would like to thank all the people outside the spinning community who’ve contributed
directly and indirectly to making this paper happen. My girlfriend Debbi for putting up with my
obsessive attempts to complete this paper in less than a week (no, I’m not joking), my
customers and clients for patiently waiting while I completed this work and could think of
absolutely nothing else, and the many friends who patiently listened to my description of my
breakthrough modeling toroids the night I finally made the necessary connections after three
interminable days running into dead ends.
I’d like to thank you, the reader for picking this paper up. I can’t imagine the list of people who
are curious enough about this topic to read through nearly 70 pages of it is terribly long, so I
salute you for your patience and curiosity.
Finally, I’d like to thank those folks who took the time out to edit this paper--combing through my
endless run-on sentences and equations, ensuring that I’d made no grammatical errors. Thanks
to Jennifer Longo (Jexime) for taming my long-winded prose and Pierre Baudin for looking over
my math. I am greatly indebted to the both of you. Another shout-out is due to Adam once again
for looking over this paper and offering a number of helpful suggestions for making many of the
mathematical ideas more clear and concise. Seriously, you rock, man :)

15

https://www.facebook.com/groups/189779111046713/permalink/732862366738382/?stream_ref=21

71

